# Final Project for Getting and Cleaning Data Course - Josh Hopkins University

## Summary
This is the final assignment for the course. In this project you can find the script to run the analysis for getting the data clean and tidy as explained in the course assignment.

## Files

In this project you can find the following files:
- Data      [folder]: with the original data run used for the analysis (detail on how to understand this data on its own README in the folder)
- run_analysis.R: script for running the analysis
- Output    [folder]: with the tidy data as required for the assignment
- README.md [file]: you are reading it :)
- codebook.txt: Explaining the variables for the outputData generated by the R script
- jhu_cleandata_project.Rproj: in case you want to replicate the whole project in RStudio

## How did I perform the analysis in the R script

### Step 0/ First we check if the original data of the study is in place. If TRUE, then we create the new output dir

Necessary for generating the output folder and setting up the whole work environment.

### Step 1/ Merge the training and the test sets to create one data set

First, we need to get the data from "train" dataset first. Then, same with "test".
Then, I each of the previous datasets by binding columns of all objects: subject + activity + dataset.
We then merge both datasets into one by binding rows: mergedData (needs some colnames magic to get them identical).

### Step 2/ Extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement

First, we need to setup the proper column names for the dataset (found on features.txt).
Then, we need to find which of these columns meet the requirements. Since there are two ways of approach it (either select "mean" or "mean()"), I will go for the second one.

### Step 3/ Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set

We now replace every activity number on mergedData with its activity label from activity_labels.txt.

### Step 4/ Appropriately label the data set with descriptive variable names

Changes: no "-" and "()", freq and time names and all in lowercase

### Step 5/ From the dataset in step 4, create a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subejct

First we group our data by subject and then by activity. We then get the average for each column of the dataset (using dplyr)

## How to read the final tidy data

Type this code to get the final data in a tidy table

```

data <- read.table(".\Output\outputData.txt", header = TRUE)
View(data)
    
```

